<br>

## Pacific Salmon Status Scanner

Wild Salmon Policy rapid statuses generated by the [WSP rapid status decision tree](./WSP Rapid Status.md) have been incorporated into DFO’s Pacific Salmon Scanner data visualization tool ('DFO's Scanner'). The Scanner is specifically designed for experts to support scientific discovery and help them contribute science to decision-making processes. Experts are those with expertise on Pacific salmon including stock assessment biologists, Indigenous groups, research scientists, habitat, harvest, and hatchery management biologists etc.

## Access to the Scanner
Note as of **October 22 2024** we are using a **phased approach** to provide access to the Scanner. At this time we are providing a focused DFO group in the Fraser-Interior Area (FIA) stock assessment group with access to the Scanner over the next month. After that time we will roll out to broader DFO groups first, and then our final phase will shift to First Nations and other external groups for access.

Additional Pacific salmon CUs will be added to the Scanner as application of the WSP rapid status algorithm is expanded. A number of CU groups are in progress and will be available in coming months.

## Version Control
We use version control for both the Scanner, and separately the data included. We recommend citing DFO's Salmon Scanner version and Data version you are using when presenting information in presentations or publications, to support the transparency and repeatability aspects of the scientific process.
Current versions:
**Scanner: 1.3.1**
**Data: 0.4.1**

## Core Principles of the Salmon Scanner
We only include data and Scanner results that have gone through a rigorous review with DFO Stock Assessment CU experts. Only after their approval do we include in the Scanner for public use. Organizing the data for WSP status work, and setting up specification files for the algorithm, are a lengthy iterative process with DFO Area experts. We have additional processes to gain input to build narratives for WSP status assessments, particularly those required for implementation of the Fisheries Act Limit Reference Points (LRPs), where a stock management unit (SMU) is below the LRP if one or more CUs is in the Red status zone, as determined through standardized WSP status methods.

There are three core principles of the WSP rapid status approach that is the foundation of the Scanner:

1. WSP CUs were identified and WSP rapid statuses were developed based on conservation biology principles, and scientific peer-reviewed publications (see Sections for background & references: [WSP Indicators and Benchmarks](./WSP Indicators and Benchmarks.md), [Integrated Status Assessments](./Integrated Status Assessments) and [WSP Rapid Status](./WSP Rapid Status)). This ensures that Pacific salmon statuses are scientifically objective, consistent, and comparable across BC/Yukon CUs. Standardized metrics also need to be widely applicable and relatively easy to use and update regularly.

2. WSP rapid status assessments require the vetting of data and evaluation of WSP rapid statuses by experts on specific salmon CUs. Nothing is presented in the Scanner in terms of data or results, unless they have been approved by DFO Area and other experts. On-going review process for WSP rapid statuses also includes local First Nations. Only data and WSP rapid status results that have been approved by DFO Area stock assessment are included in the Scanner.

3. Continual learning & refinement. As we continue to add CUs through expert-driven vetting and review, we will continue to learn and refine the WSP rapid status approach going forward, as required.

## Scanner Applications: Who was it designed for? What is the Scanner used for?
The Salmon Scanner was designed by salmon experts to support their work, and to support decision-making processes. This tool enables users to compare WSP statuses and trends in statuses or abundances across Pacific salmon CUs in BC and the Yukon. The tool includes a selection of built-in data visualizations designed to aid in scientific discovery, support decision-making processes, and support communications to various audiences. 

In addition to statuses, DFO’s Salmon Scanner presents supplementary information that allows technical experts to explore trends across CUs on different spatial, temporal, biological, and management-based levels of aggregation.

Experts that may benefit from the Scanner include stock assessment biologists, habitat, harvest, and hatchery management biologists, Indigenous technical experts, biologists working on SARA implementation, and researchers working on salmon and their ecosystems. 

In DFO's Salmon Scanner, rapid statuses should be interpreted as akin to a ‘check engine light’, or other diagnostic tool that can highlight potential issues and be used to monitor trends through informal coastwide status scans. 

In decision-making contexts, WSP rapid statuses in the Scanner are combined with expert input and are peer-reviewed to ensure their validity. Such an expert review process is being used to support status evaluations for stock management units against their limit reference-points (LRP), as legally required under the modernized Fisheries Act (2019). The Scanner supports integration of WSP rapid status information and results with local CU knowledge. It also supports the braiding of these Western Science status results with Indigenous Knowledge to enrich the understanding of Conservation Unit (CU) WSP status and associated narratives on factors contributing to statuses and trends. Incorporating local CU expertise with WSP rapid statuses is required for more formal processes, noteably those related to _Fisheries Act_ Stock Managemeent Unit (SMU) limit reference point (LRP) determination. An SMU is below its LRP if one or more CUs in the SMU are in the WSP Red status zone as determined by the WSP rapid status approach with CU expert input. 


See how the Scanner works by watching our [Scanner video series](./Scanner Videos.md).
